1919 workers strikes, the army and Belfast. Belfast was also presenting problems for
Prime Minister David Lloyd George. Firstly let me take you back, before the war there were a number
of strikes and I'd recommend the excellent work of Simon Webb in his book 1919 Britain's Year of
Revolution. In the years before World War One there was considerable industrial unrest which
peaked in 1912 when 40 million working days were lost across Britain. Then in 1914 the Triple
Alliance was formed. This was a triumvirate of the three big trade union areas coal, rail and dock
workers and only the war stopped a general strike that would have crippled the nation.
Patriotism affected industrial unrest but by 1917 that atmosphere was changing and seamstresses,
bank clerks, telegraph messengers and munition workers all went on strike. The government
introduced the defense of the realm act in 1914 which was draconian and forced citizens to do
some things and forbade them from doing others. One critical clause gave the government absolute
freedom to introduce further regulations as and when needed. For example engineers could not change
jobs without approval and it was an offense to suggest the war was a bad thing. Although some
rules were blatantly bizarre regulation 40b concerned the supply of cocaine to actresses.
As soon as the war had ended there was the December 1918 election and David George had made three
significant promises all of which he was to break. One that those who had fought would return to a
land fit for heroes. Two there would be habitation for heroes and three demobilization back to Sibby
street would be speedy. Well no new housing had been built in fact while the men had been away
their wives had led rent strikes. There were few jobs and demobilization was slow
and Winston Churchill had tried to send the armed forces to Russia.
So at the end of the war the trade union congress on behalf of all workers negotiated a reduction in
working hours from 54 to 47 a week. However this was rejected in a ballot of workers by three to one
and the rank and file chose to ignore the TUC. On the 27th of January the industrial war between
workers and governments began in Glasgow and in Belfast. Well we've mentioned Glasgow in chapter
seven of this. And when but in Belfast the general strike began the interesting thing was that workers
were not simply demanding less money less hours for more wages as was traditional. Instead they
demanded a 40 hour working week as an experiment with the object of absorbing the unemployed.
The strikes were no longer simply strikes they were now a people's movement taking strategy out of the hands of government.
In Belfast the strikers took control of electricity and the added issue was the general demand for Irish independence
which had led to the election of Sinn Fein MPs in the late 1920s.
The strike was a result of the
election of Sinn Fein MPs in the general election of 1918. Six days earlier on the 21st the first
meeting of Dale Arron had occurred in Dublin declaring an independent Ireland on the 21st of January
and at the killing of two policemen in county Tipperary that same day at the beginning of
what was the Anglo-Irish war for independence.
The strikers in Belfast the strike committee were in total control of electricity
they even were deciding which industry could have electricity.
In effect no industry could have it but hospitals could. They were seeking to create a workers
parliament and government knew this was step one to independence but it was also bolshevism.
As the Belfast newsletters headlined these objectives are not industrial they are
revolutionary. Well when workers in London announced they were going to join the general strike
the government had to act which it did very forcibly in Glasgow and it also then amended
the defence of the realm act making it illegal to deprive the inhabitants of electricity
with a penalty of six months hard work labour for any worker that did so.
Well after gas and electricity had been disrupted for three weeks in Belfast the army was brought
in. Army detachment, Lewis machine guns mounted at the electricity station
and in other places led to the strike collapsing but it was now clear the army would be used to
bring order and that their orders were clear whatever force was necessary.
So the Belfast general strike collapsed but the atmosphere of strikes in 1919
was to continue not least because the police went on strike twice in 1919 in London and in Liverpool
the government had to sack 2 000 police officers and make strikes by the police illegal
which is true to this day.